Command-line reference
======================

Here you can find the command-line reference.

Each command is described with an example.

**Subcommands**

- *machine*: manage one machine at a time (machine mode)
- *config*: manage groups of machines at once (config mode)
- *bundle*: manage groups of configs at once (bundle mode)
- *env*: manage environments
- *schema*: manage schemas
- *volume*: manage volumes
- *user*: manage user config files
- *scaffold*: scaffolding
- *registry*: start and stop registry


Machine commands
----------------

machine start
+++++++++++++

Start a single machine, in foreground or in background (``-d/--daemon``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Start the `test` machine in foreground
    docknv machine start test

    # Start the `test` machine in background
    docknv machine start test -d # or --daemon


machine stop
++++++++++++

Stop a single machine.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Stop the `test` machine
    docknv machine stop test


machine restart
+++++++++++++++

Restart a single machine. You can normally restart a machine, in foreground or in background (``-d/--daemon``), and you can force the restart (``-f/--force``).

Force restart will cause a complete `stop` and a complete `start`.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Restart the `test` machine in foreground
    docknv machine restart test

    # Restart the `test` machine in background
    docknv machine restart test -d # or --daemon

    # Force restart the `test` machine in background
    docknv machine restart test -f -d # or --force --daemon


machine run
+++++++++++

Run a custom command on a single machine by creating a new container. You can run this command in foreground or in background (``-d/--daemon``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Run a Python HTTP server on machine `test`
    docknv machine run test "python -m http.server"

    # Execute a ping command in background on machine `test`
    docknv machine run test -d "ping www.google.fr"


machine exec
++++++++++++

Execute a custom command on a **running** container. You can disable the TTY (``--no-tty``) and fetch the return code (``-r/--return-code``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # List the root folder content on running machine `test`
    docknv machine exec test "bash -c 'ls /'"

    # Sum numbers on machine `test`, and get the return code
    docknv machine exec test --return-code "python -c '5+5'"

    # Execute a ping command on machine `test` and disable TTY
    docknv machine exec test --no-tty "ping www.google.fr"

machine shell
+++++++++++++

Run a shell on a **running** container. You can change the shell executable as a second parameter, and if needed you can *create* the container before running the shell (``-c/--create``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Run a shell (/bin/bash as default) on running machine `test`
    docknv machine shell test

    # Run a custom shell (/bin/zsh) on running machine `test`
    docknv machine shell test /bin/zsh

    # Create the container and run a shell on machine `test`
    docknv machine shell test -c # or --create

machine logs
++++++++++++

View the logs of a **running** container. You can show everything, or get the last lines (``--tail``  with count parameter), or even follow the logs (``-f/--follow``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Get complete logs from running machine `test`
    docknv machine logs test

    # Get 10 last lines of logs from running machine `test`
    docknv machine logs test --tail 10

    # Follow the logs from running machine `test`
    docknv machine logs test -f # or --follow

machine push
++++++++++++

Push a file from the host to a **running** container. First, you specify the host path, then the container path.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Push a sample.txt file to a running machine `test`
    docknv machine push test ./sample.txt /tmp/sample.txt


machine pull
++++++++++++

Pull a file from a **running** container to the host. First, you specify the container path then the host path.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Pull a sample.txt file from a running machine `test`
    docknv machine pull test /tmp/sample.txt ./sample.txt


machine build
+++++++++++++

Build a machine image. If you have edited the Dockerfile of your image, run this command to rebuild.

The image will automatically be pushed to the local registry, but you can prevent this ( ``--do-not-push``). You can also ignore the cache and rebuild everything (``--no-cache``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Update the build of the `test` machine
    docknv machine build test

    # Update the build of the `test` machine without pushing it to the local registry
    docknv machine build test --do-not-push

    # Rebuild the `test` machine without cache
    docknv machine build test --no-cache


machine freeze [EXPERIMENTAL]
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Freeze a machine, by packing linked static volumes inside of the Dockerfile.
This allows for quick development cycle and ready-to-use Dockerfile for Swarm deployment (for example).

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Freeze the `test` machine
    docknv machine freeze test

---------------------------------

Configuration commands
----------------------

config status
+++++++++++++

Show the current configuration for the project.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Show the current configuration name
    docknv config status


config ls
+++++++++

List the available configurations for the project.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # List the available configurations
    docknv config ls


config use
++++++++++

Set a configuration as active for the project.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Define the `standard` configuration as current
    docknv config use standard


config start
++++++++++++

Start the machines from the active configuration. You can start these machines in the foreground if needed (``--foreground``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Start the current configuration in background (default)
    docknv config start

    # Start the current configuration in foreground
    docknv config start --foreground


config restart
++++++++++++++

Restart the machines from the active configuration. You can restart these machines in the foreground if needed (``--foreground``), and you can *force* the restart by stopping and starting (``-f/--force``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Restart the current configuration
    docknv config restart

    # Force restart the current configuration and put in foreground
    docknv config restart --foreground -f # or --force


config stop
+++++++++++

Stop the machines from the active configuration.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Stop the current configuration
    docknv config stop


config ps
+++++++++

Get the machine statuses from the active configuration.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Get the machine statuses
    docknv config ps


config unset
++++++++++++

Unset the current configuration.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Unset the current configuration
    docknv config unset


config build
++++++++++++

Build the machines from the active configuration. As for the `machine build`, you can build without pushing to the local registry (``--do-not-push``), and rebuild without cache (``--no-cache``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Build the current configuration
    docknv config build

    # Build the current configuration without pushing to the local registry
    docknv config build --do-not-push

    # Rebuild the current configuration without cache
    docknv config build --no-cache


config create
+++++++++++++

Create a configuration from a *configuration name*, a *schema name*, an *environment name*, and if needed, a *namespace* (``-n/--namespace``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Build a `test` configuration with the `test_schema` schema and the `test_env` environment.
    docknv config create test test_schema test_env

    # Build a `test2` configuration with the `test_schema` schema, the `test_env` environment, and the `test` namespace
    docknv config create test2 test_schema test_env -n test


config update
+++++++++++++

Update a configuration by rerendering templates and re-copying static files. If you do not specify a configuration name, il will update the current configuration. If you do specify a configuration name, il will be updated and set as current.

With the ``-r/--restart`` option, you can automatically stop the target configuration, update it, and restart it. It is safer on Windows because it did not like updating mount points while the machines are on.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Update the current configuration
    docknv config update

    # Update the `test` configuration and set it as current
    docknv config update test

    # Update the current configuration by stopping, updating and starting
    docknv config update -r

    # Update the `test` configuration by stopping, updating and starting
    docknv config update test -r


config set-schema
+++++++++++++++++

Change the schema for a configuration name.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Change the schema of a `test` configuration to set the `test_schema2` schema
    docknv config set-schema test test_schema2


config set-env
++++++++++++++

Change the environment for a configuration name.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Change the environment of a `test` configuration to set the `test_env2` environment
    docknv config set-env test test_env2


config rm
+++++++++

Delete a configuration. If you delete your current configuration, il will be unset.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Remove the `test` configuration
    docknv config rm test


---------------------------------

Bundle commands
---------------

bundle start
++++++++++++

Start multiple configurations.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Start the `test` configuration
    docknv bundle start test
    # same as 'docknv config use test; docknv config start'

    # Start the `test` and `test2` configuration
    docknv bundle start test test2


bundle restart
++++++++++++++

Restart multiple configurations. You can force the restart (``-f/--force``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Restart the `test` configuration
    docknv bundle restart test
    # same as 'docknv config use test; docknv config restart'

    # Restart the `test` configuration with force
    docknv bundle restart -f test
    # same as 'docknv config use test; docknv config restart -f'

    # Restart the `test` and `test2` configuration
    docknv bundle restart test test2


bundle stop
+++++++++++

Stop multiple configurations.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Stop the `test` configuration
    docknv bundle stop test
    # same as 'docknv config use test; docknv config stop'

    # Stop the `test` and `test2` configuration
    docknv bundle stop test test2


bundle ps
+++++++++

Check the processes of multiple configurations.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Check the processes of the `test` configuration
    docknv bundle ps test
    # same as 'docknv config use test; docknv config ps'

    # Check the processes of the `test` and `test2` configurations
    docknv bundle ps test test2


bundle build
++++++++++++

Build the machines of multiple configurations. As for the `config build` command, you can build without cache (``--no-cache``), and without pushing to the local registry (``--do-not-push``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Build the machines of the `test` configuration without pushing
    docknv bundle build --do-not-push test
    # same as 'docknv config use test; docknv config build --do-not-push'

    # Build the machines of the `test` and `test2` configurations without cache
    docknv bundle build --no-cache test test2


---------------------------------

Environment commands
--------------------

env ls
++++++

List the available environments for the project.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # List the available environments
    docknv env ls


env show
++++++++

Show the contents of an environment file for the project.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Show the contents of the `test_env` environment file
    docknv env show test_env


---------------------------------

Schema commands
---------------

schema ls
+++++++++

List the available schemas for the project.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # List the available schemas
    docknv schema ls


---------------------------------

Volume commands
---------------

volume ls
+++++++++

List the named volumes for the project.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # List the named volumes
    docknv volume ls


volume rm
+++++++++

Remove a named volume.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Remove the `test` named volume
    docknv volume rm test


---------------------------------

User commands
-------------

user clean
++++++++++

Clean the user project files or config for the current project.
If you do not specify a config name, il will remove all of the current user project configuration.

The user project configuration is located at ``$HOME/.docknv/$PROJECT_NAME``.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Remove the `test` user configuration
    docknv user clean test

    # Remove all of the user project configuration
    docknv user clean


user rm-lock
++++++++++++

Remove the user lockfile. If something bad happened and the lockfile persisted, **if you are sure of hat you are doing**, you can safely remove it with this command.

The lockfile is named ``.$UID.lock``.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Remove the user lockfile
    docknv user rm-lock


---------------------------------

Scaffold commands
-----------------

scaffold project
++++++++++++++++

Create a whole docknv project from scratch, at a given path. The **project name is the path basename**.

It will automatically generate the base folder structure, a ``.gitignore`` and a ``config.yml``.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Generate an `example` project at /tmp/test/example.
    docknv scaffold project /tmp/test/example


scaffold image
++++++++++++++

Create an image entry for the current project. You must specify the image name, the image URL (like ``portainer/portainer`` or ``ubuntu``), and an image tag (by default ``latest``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Create a "portainer" image entry with the "portainer/portainer" url and the "latest" tag
    docknv scaffold image portainer portainer/portainer

    # Create an "ubuntu" image entry with the "ubuntu" image and the "16.04" tag
    docknv scaffold image ubuntu ubuntu 16.04


scaffold env
++++++++++++

Create an environment file from scratch, or inherits from an existing environment file (``-i/--inherit``).

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Create a `test_env` environment from scratch
    docknv scaffold env test_env
    # Create a `test_env2` environment by inheriting from the `default` environment
    docknv scaffold env test_env2 -i default


---------------------------------

Registry commands
-----------------

registry start
++++++++++++++

Start the local registry.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Start the local registry
    docknv registry start


registry stop
+++++++++++++

Stop the local registry.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Stop the local registry
    docknv registry stop
